test262/test/annexB/language/eval-code/direct/script-decl-lex-collision-in-sloppy-mode.js:13: Test262Error: Expected a SyntaxError to be thrown but no exception was thrown at all
test262/test/built-ins/Function/internals/Construct/derived-this-uninitialized-realm.js:20: Test262Error: Expected a ReferenceError but got a different error constructor with the same name
test262/test/built-ins/Function/internals/Construct/derived-this-uninitialized-realm.js:20: strict mode: Test262Error: Expected a ReferenceError but got a different error constructor with the same name
test262/test/built-ins/RegExp/lookahead-quantifier-match-groups.js:27: Test262Error: Expected [a, abc] and [a, undefined] to have the same contents. ? quantifier
test262/test/built-ins/RegExp/lookahead-quantifier-match-groups.js:27: strict mode: Test262Error: Expected [a, abc] and [a, undefined] to have the same contents. ? quantifier
test262/test/built-ins/RegExp/unicode_full_case_folding.js:20: Test262Error: \u0390 does not match \u1fd3
test262/test/built-ins/RegExp/unicode_full_case_folding.js:20: strict mode: Test262Error: \u0390 does not match \u1fd3
test262/test/built-ins/String/prototype/localeCompare/15.5.4.9_CE.js:62: Test262Error: String.prototype.localeCompare considers ö (\u006f\u0308) ≠ ö (\u00f6).
test262/test/built-ins/String/prototype/localeCompare/15.5.4.9_CE.js:62: strict mode: Test262Error: String.prototype.localeCompare considers ö (\u006f\u0308) ≠ ö (\u00f6).
test262/test/built-ins/TypedArray/prototype/sort/sort-tonumber.js:30: TypeError: ArrayBuffer is detached (Testing with Float64Array.)
test262/test/built-ins/TypedArray/prototype/sort/sort-tonumber.js:30: strict mode: TypeError: ArrayBuffer is detached (Testing with Float64Array.)
test262/test/language/expressions/assignment/target-member-computed-reference-null.js:32: Test262Error: Expected a DummyError but got a TypeError
test262/test/language/expressions/assignment/target-member-computed-reference-null.js:32: strict mode: Test262Error: Expected a DummyError but got a TypeError
test262/test/language/expressions/assignment/target-member-computed-reference-undefined.js:32: Test262Error: Expected a DummyError but got a TypeError
test262/test/language/expressions/assignment/target-member-computed-reference-undefined.js:32: strict mode: Test262Error: Expected a DummyError but got a TypeError
test262/test/language/expressions/dynamic-import/usage-from-eval.js:26: TypeError: $DONE() not called
test262/test/language/expressions/dynamic-import/usage-from-eval.js:26: strict mode: TypeError: $DONE() not called
test262/test/language/expressions/optional-chaining/optional-call-preserves-this.js:21: TypeError: cannot read property 'c' of undefined
test262/test/language/expressions/optional-chaining/optional-call-preserves-this.js:15: strict mode: TypeError: cannot read property '_b' of undefined
test262/test/language/global-code/script-decl-lex-var-declared-via-eval-sloppy.js:13: Test262Error: variable Expected a SyntaxError to be thrown but no exception was thrown at all
test262/test/language/module-code/namespace/internals/define-own-property.js:30: Test262Error: Object.freeze: 1 Expected a TypeError to be thrown but no exception was thrown at all
test262/test/language/statements/async-generator/yield-star-promise-not-unwrapped.js:25: TypeError: $DONE() not called
test262/test/language/statements/async-generator/yield-star-promise-not-unwrapped.js:25: strict mode: TypeError: $DONE() not called
test262/test/language/statements/async-generator/yield-star-return-then-getter-ticks.js:131: TypeError: $DONE() not called
test262/test/language/statements/async-generator/yield-star-return-then-getter-ticks.js:131: strict mode: TypeError: $DONE() not called
test262/test/language/statements/for-of/head-lhs-async-invalid.js:14: unexpected error type: Test262: This statement should not be evaluated.
test262/test/language/statements/for-of/head-lhs-async-invalid.js:14: strict mode: unexpected error type: Test262: This statement should not be evaluated.
